Add dualboot guide (#54)
Eeems-Org/remarkable.guide: src/tech/dualboot.rst

==========================
Dualbooting the reMarkable
==========================

.. contents:: Contents
   :local:
   :backlinks: none

:raw-html:`<div class="warning">⚠️ Make sure you have backed up your SSH password. ⚠️<br/>`

If you didn't write down your password and something goes terribly wrong, you will be unable to access your device. An :doc:`../tech/recovery` will be required.
It is also recommended to :ref:`setup a SSH key <ssh-key>` instead of using password authentication.

When SSHing to a different OS version, you will get a cryptographic key mismatch. This is normal, and you can safely remove the offending line from your ~/.ssh/known_hosts file.
:raw-html:`</div>`

Choosing the versions
=====================

:raw-html:`<div class="warning">⚠️ Documents warning. ⚠️`

All documents opened on 3.x can't be opened in previous versions because of the new .lines format, which adds infinite scrolling and typed text.
:raw-html:`</div>`

> Before starting, you should know what versions to dualboot, depending on hat you want to do. For toltec, it is recommended to follow `the toltec website <https://toltec-dev.org/>`_, while for rM hacks, you should read `the table on their github repo <https://gthub.com/mb1986/rm-hacks>`_.

Reviewer: This should link to the toltec page, so that only one place needs to be updated if the URL changes.

Author: Only toltec?

Reviewer: We don't have a rm-hacks page yet

Author: So not to github

Reviewer: I'm confused as to what you are asking.

remarkable.guide does not have a rm-hacks page yet, and it does have a toltec page. Instructions for toltec should point to that page to avoid duplicating information that needs to be updated on remarkable.guide when it needs to be changed.

Author: Oh you meant the toltec link, not rm hax

Author: Fixed in latest.

.. code-block:: shell

  codextl install <version>

Where ``<version>`` can be an OS version, ``toltec`` (which installs the latest version supported by toltec) or ``latest`` (which installs the latest version of the OS)

Once it is done, you can tap the "Update done, reboot" button to reboot into the freshly-installed OS

Installing the switch service
=============================

While this is already a dualboot, it is very impractical, as you need to use `switch.sh <https://github.com/ddvk/remarkable-update/tree/main?tab=readme-ov-file#to-switch-the-partition-ie-boot-the-previous-version>`_ every time. 

To fix this, `a simple systemd service <https://github.com/FouzR/rM_dualboot/>`_ has been made to address this issue. It makes the device change active partition at each reboot, allowing you to boot the previous version of the OS by just restarting the reMarkable.

:raw-html:`<div class="warning">⚠️ Installation notice. ⚠️`

You should install this on both partitions, to be able to successfully dual-boot your reMarkable and not remain "locked" on one partition
:raw-html:`</div>`

To install it on a toltec installation, it is as simple as running 

.. code-block:: shell

>     wget -O install.sh https://raw.githubusercontent.com/FouzR/rM_dualboot/main/install.sh && echo "d5d7461daf04a09df2f5d5545ff946cb7f0479caa2587418891c38942536ca0a  install.sh" | sha256sum -c && sh ./install.sh

Reviewer: We should not duplicate instructions here that can get out of date. We should instead be linking to the source of the instructions and providing generic information. See https://remarkable.guide/guide/software/toltec.html#install-toltec for an example

Author: I will fix it tomorrow

> If you are on a non-toltec partition, instead, you should download a statically compiled wget version that supports TLS (like https://toltec-dev.org/thirdparty/bin/wget-v1.21.1-1) on your host PC and copy it to the reMarkable, before downloading the installer. To do that, you can run

Author: You mean downloading the file to the toltec one and then also executing it on the other? I would want to account for people using both without toltec (for any reason)

> If you are on a non-toltec partition, instead, you should download a statically compiled wget version that supports TLS (like https://toltec-dev.org/thirdparty/bin/wget-v1.21.1-1) on your host PC and copy it to the reMarkable, before downloading the installer. To do that, you can run

Reviewer: > You mean downloading the file to the toltec one and then also executing it on the other? I would want to account for people using both without toltec (for any reason)

Yes, downloading on the older version and then running it on the newer from the one it's downloaded from.

It would be better to update the instructions on rM_dualboot to account for the newer version, or to fix the issue with running on the newer OS versions, than to have the instructions here.

==========================
Dualbooting the reMarkable
==========================

.. contents:: Contents
   :local:
   :backlinks: none

:raw-html:`<div class="warning">⚠️ Before starting ⚠️<br/>`

This guide requires :doc:`../guide/access/ssh`

:raw-html:`</div>`

Choosing the versions
=====================

Before starting, you should know what versions to dualboot, depending on hat you want to do. For toltec, it is recommended to follow :doc:`this guide <../guide/software/toltec>`, while for rM hacks, you should read `the table on their github repo <https://github.com/mb1986/rm-hacks>`_.

> 
> In this example we are assuming that 2.15.1189 is being used for Toltec, and that 3.9.4 is being used for rm-hacks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
No longer required as we don't do anything version specific in the rest of the examples.

This guide requires :doc:`../guide/access/ssh`

:raw-html:`</div>`

Choosing the versions
=====================

Before starting, you should know what versions to dualboot, depending on hat you want to do. For toltec, it is recommended to follow :doc:`this guide <../guide/software/toltec>`, while for rM hacks, you should read `the table on their github repo <https://github.com/mb1986/rm-hacks>`_.

In this example we are assuming that 2.15.1189 is being used for Toltec, and that 3.9.4 is being used for rm-hacks.

Downgrading/Upgrading the OS
============================

For more information on how to install a specific OS version see :ref:`upgrade`.

Installing the switch service
=============================

While this is already a dualboot, it is very impractical, as you need to use `switch.sh <https://github.com/ddvk/remarkable-update/tree/main?tab=readme-ov-file#to-switch-the-partition-ie-boot-the-previous-version>`_ every time. 

`FouzR/rM_dualboot <https://github.com/FouzR/rM_dualboot>`_ handles setting up both partitions to automatically run ``switch.sh`` every time the device is rebooted.

Installing rM-hacks
===================

> reMarkable Hacks can be installed normally but, when loading xochitl from a version without the hacks, at the next reboot, they will disappear.
> 
> There are two ways around this problem:
> 
> - Bind mounting ``/home/root/.cache/remarkable/xochitl/qmlcache/`` somewhere where it does not get overwritten
> 
> - Changing the ``QML_DISK_CACHE_PATH`` variable on the other partition (recommended)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To install rm-hacks, follow the `rm-hacks installation instructions` <https://github.com/mb1986/rm-hacks?tab=readme-ov-file#installation>`_. After this, you will need to make changes to ensure that it doesn't get removed when you reboot into the other partition. There are two ways to handle this. The recommended way is to change the ``QML_DISK_CACHE_PATH`` environment variable. The other option would be to bind mount 
``/home/root/.cache/remarkable/xochitl/qmlcache/`` to a different location.
```

Editing the ``QML_DISK_CACHE_PATH`` variable
--------------------------------------------

The ``QML_DISK_CACHE_PATH`` variable specifies the `QML <https://doc.qt.io/qt-5/qmlapplications.html>`_ cache path of a `Qt application <https://doc.qt.io/qt-5/index.html>`_. This caches the code that is used to generate the xochitl GUI and handle many of it's interactions. When a version of xochitl is launched that does not match the current cache, it is removed and a new cache generated. This will wipe rm-hacks when dual booting, so we will need to setup a new location for the cache.

Setting it on toltec
____________________

> If you are running toltec on the second partition (i.e. the one without rM-hacks), you can just create the ``/home/root/.qml`` folder and create a new file ending in .env in ``/opt/etc/xochitl.env.d``, called for example ``99-xochitl.env``, with the following content:
> 
> .. code-block:: shell
> 
>   export QML_DISK_CACHE_PATH="/home/root/.qml"

Reviewer: This should get the same treatment as `Setting it without toltec`.

```suggestion
If you are running toltec on the second partition you can create an environment override for xochitl that will set the ``QML_DISK_CACHE_PATH``.

.. code-block:: shell
mkdir -p /home/root/.cache/qmlcache
cat > /opt/etc/xochitl.env.d/99-override-qmldir.env << EOF
export QML_DISK_CACHE_PATH="/home/root/.cache/qmlcache"
EOF
```

Setting it without toltec
_________________________

If you are not running toltec, you can override the xochitl ``QML_CACHE_PATH`` using systemd override files. 

.. code-block:: shell
  # Create overrides folder
  mkdir /etc/systemd/system/xochitl.service.d
  # Create override

>   cat > /etc/systemd/system/xochitl.service.d/cache.conf << EOF

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  cat > /etc/systemd/system/xochitl.service.d/override-qmlcache.conf << EOF
```

==========================
Dualbooting the reMarkable
==========================

.. contents:: Contents
   :local:
   :backlinks: none

:raw-html:`<div class="warning">⚠️ Before starting ⚠️<br/>`

This guide requires :doc:`../guide/access/ssh`

:raw-html:`</div>`

Choosing the versions
=====================

Before starting, you should know what versions to dualboot, depending on hat you want to do. For toltec, it is recommended to follow :doc:`this guide <../guide/software/toltec>`, while for rM hacks, you should read `the table on their github repo <https://github.com/mb1986/rm-hacks>`_.

> Here, I'll be using 2.15.1189 (for Toltec) and 3.9.4 (for rm-hacks)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example we are assuming that 2.15.1189 is being used for Toltec, and that 3.9.4 is being used for rm-hacks.
```

Downgrading/Upgrading the OS
============================

> To download (and install) a specific OS version, follow :ref:`these instructions <upgrade>`

Reviewer: This should probably be a little more specific about what we are actually doing in this example, but from a higher level. Something about installing 3.9.4 on one partition, and 2.15.1.1 on the other. For linking to the upgrade portion, it may be better to use something like this:

```
For more information on how to install a specific OS version see :ref:`upgrade`.

Installing the switch service
=============================

While this is already a dualboot, it is very impractical, as you need to use `switch.sh <https://github.com/ddvk/remarkable-update/tree/main?tab=readme-ov-file#to-switch-the-partition-ie-boot-the-previous-version>`_ every time. 

To fix this, you can use `a simple systemd service <https://github.com/FouzR/rM_dualboot/>`_.

Installing rM-hacks
===================

reMarkable Hacks can be installed normally but, when loading xochitl from a version without the hacks, at the next reboot, they will disappear.

There are two ways around this problem:

- Bind mounting ``/home/root/.cache/remarkable/xochitl/qmlcache/`` somewhere where it does not get overwritten

- Changing the ``QML_DISK_CACHE_PATH`` variable on the other partition (recommended)

Editing the ``QML_DISK_CACHE_PATH`` variable
--------------------------------------------

> The QML_DISK_CACHE_PATH variable specifies the cache path of a QT Application (like  xochitl). It can be set in different ways, depending if you are on toltec or not

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ``QML_DISK_CACHE_PATH`` variable specifies the `QML <https://doc.qt.io/qt-5/qmlapplications.html>`_ cache path of a `Qt application <https://doc.qt.io/qt-5/index.html>`_. This caches the code that is used to generate the xochitl GUI and handle many of it's interactions. When a version of xochitl is launched that does not match the current cache, it is removed and a new cache generated. This will wipe rm-hacks when dual booting, so we will need to setup a new location for the cache.
```

Setting it on toltec
____________________

If you are running toltec on the second partition (i.e. the one without rM-hacks), you can just create the ``/home/root/.qml`` folder and create a new file ending in .env in ``/opt/etc/xochitl.env.d``, called for example ``99-xochitl.env``, with the following content:

.. code-block:: shell

  export QML_DISK_CACHE_PATH="/home/root/.qml"

Setting it without toltec
_________________________

If you are not running toltec, you can edit the ``/etc/systemd/system/xochitl.service`` file and add the following content **right before** ``ExecStart=/usr/bin/xochitl/system``

.. code-block:: shell

  Environment=QML_DISK_CACHE_PATH="/home/root/.qml"

The following is an example of the modified service

.. code-block:: console

  [Unit]
  Description=reMarkable main application
  StartLimitIntervalSec=600
  StartLimitBurst=4
  OnFailure=remarkable-fail.service
  After=home.mount
  Wants=rm-sync.service

  [Service]
  Environment=QML_DISK_CACHE_PATH="/home/root/.qml"
  ExecStart=/usr/bin/xochitl --system
  Restart=on-failure
  WatchdogSec=60

  [Install]

>   WantedBy=multi-user.target

Reviewer: I would not recommend doing it this way, instead an override should be created, this can be done by running `systemctl edit xochitl.service` and then adding the content. But it probably would be better to provide the commands to create the override, systemd and then restart xochitl if it's running.

Reviewer: It might be better to just have a script that handles both a toltec install and a non-toltec install. I would recommend also opening a feature request to rm_dualboot to add this automatically.

Author: In the future, maybe something to control a dualboot (dualbootctl?)

Reviewer: Perhaps

Using rmfakecloud
=================

> The cloud must be configured on both partitions, as it will otherwise get disconnected at every reboot due to an invalid login token.

Reviewer: This should link to rmfakecloud's website for more information on how to configure it. Probably to https://ddvk.github.io/rmfakecloud/remarkable/setup/
